This is a gallon.
And this is nuclear waste.
And this is 56 million gallons of nuclear waste.
It’s toxic, radioactive, and is sitting in old, leaky tanks, just a few hours upriver from Portland.
It’s here, at Hanford.
Where all that waste is polluting groundwater...
...which is seeping toward the Columbia River.
And after more than 20 years and $19 billion spent,
none of it has been treated.
For decades, Hanford was America’s plutonium factory.
It was one of the original Manhattan Project sites,
supplying the radioactive material at the heart of America’s nuclear arsenal.
Over the course of Hanford’s military lifetime, it was home to nine nuclear reactors,
used to irradiate uranium fuel rods creating plutonium.
That plutonium was then extracted with chemicals, processed and shipped off to weapons factories.
Each step of that process produced radioactive waste.
Some of it liquid, some of it solid, some of it somewhere in between.
For decades workers poured much of the liquid waste
hundreds of billions of gallons worth
into the ground.
They dumped the rest
including solids and sludges
into underground tanks to be dealt with later.
And now, it's later.
A patch of contaminated groundwater
the size of Seattle
lies under the site.
Those old tanks are deteriorating
And the official plan to clean it all up
has serious problems.
The basic idea is to pump up and
treat the groundwater,
get the waste out of the tanks,
And process it into glass logs.
The first big problem is that radioactive
waste can generate flammable gasses,
which can build up in the tanks and
treatment facilies
and if ignited...
On top of that, some of the waste in the tanks
still contains plutonium, which is heavy.
And as the waste is moved around
the plutonium could settle out, clump together
and start an uncontrolled chain reaction.
That might not be such a big deal
if workers could monitor and step in
to prevent the accident.
But the treatment process
at least for the most hazardous waste
has to happen in special rooms
called black cells
that are too radioactive for humans to enter.
According to the official plan, the machinery
in those black cells has to work smoothly
for 40 years
with no direct human intervention.
If something goes wrong, there would be little
workers could do to prevent hazardous
waste from spreading around the site.
But the clean up has made some progress.
The liquid in the oldest, leakiest tanks
was transferred to newer tanks.
And in 2015, workers treated
2 billion gallons of groundwater.
But the vast majority of contaminated
groundwater is still there.
And they haven't even started treating
the actual waste in the tanks.
In fact they haven't even finished building
the treatment plants.
Construction was supposed to be done by 2007.
That slipped to 2011,
then 2019.
And recently the deadline was extended again
to 2036 for the most dangerous waste.
Humans have never cleaned up a mess
quite like the waste at Hanford.
And after years of delays,
we don't know if the current plan will be
up to the task.
That means that without
some breakthrough technology
or new plan,
those 56 million gallons of nuclear waste
will likely continue to sit just hours
upriver from Portland.